[Options]
AddToInfo=1
Caption=Origin of the name
CityName=Montreal
StringToAdd='Origin of the name:'

[1 GREEN ANGRIGNON - HONORÉ-BEAUGRAND]
Lionel-Groulx=Lionel-Groulx Abbé Lionel Groulx (1878-1967), a native of Vaudreuil, was an influential Québécois historian. He studied in theology at the Grand Séminaire de Montréal and was ordained in 1903. He taught at Valleyfield seminary from 1903 to 1915 and was named honorary canon in 1943. Abbé Groulx was also the founding president of the Franco-American History Institute in 1946 and director of the Révue d'histoire de l'Amérique française (1947-1967). This station's name was changed during the planning phase to commemorate Abbé Groulx, after his death, and rue Lionel-Groulx was renamed after the station. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Berri-UQAM=The origin of the name Berri, in use since 1818, is still uncertain. The lands in this area, which belonged to Migeon de Branssat in 1669, were called La Gauchetière and Berry. It is unknown whether this name refers to the French province by the same name. The Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM) was created by the Government of Quebec in 1968, and was opened in 1969. The campus in this neighbourhood was opened in 1979. The station was renamed Berri-UQAM on 1 January 1988; until that time, it was called Berri-de Montigny Rue de Montigny (now part of boul. de Maisonneuve, except for a small portion near Place des Arts) was named in honour of the Testard de Montigny family. The Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM) was established by the Government of Québec in accordance with the Act respecting the Université du Québec adopted on December 18, 1968. The UQAM welcomed its first students in the Fall of 1969. The institution had a rapid growth and inaugurated phase 1 of its new campus in 1979 near the metro station. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
                                        
[2 ORANGE CÔTE-VERTU - MONTMORENCY]
Côte-Vertu=Côte-Vertu The area known as Notre-Dame-de-Vertu, Notre-Dame-de-la-Vertu, or Notre-Dame-des-Vertus was probably created around 1700; the latter name was used in a 1702 map. As in many other côtes in the island of Montreal, the street took the name of the côte. Notre-Dame disappeared from the name, as with Notre-Dame-de-Liesse and Notre-Dame-des-Neiges, and the chemin de la Côte-Vertu took the name it has today. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro,
Du Collège=Collège The name of rue du Collège refers to nearby Saint-Laurent College. It was first founded in 1847 by the Congrégation Ste-Croix at the request of Father St-Germain of the parish and of Cardinal Bourget. It became a cégep in 1974. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro,
De La Savane=Savane Rue de la Savane, already known by that name by 1778, no doubt derived its name from having passed through either a savannah or a swamp (savane in Québécois French). Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro,
Namur=Namur is a city in Belgium, the capital of the province of the same name and of the region of Wallonia. This name applied to the westernmost section of modern Rue Jean-Talon, and was used as the planning name of this station even after the street was joined to the rest of Rue Jean-Talon and renamed accordingly. To preserve the name of the metro station since no better name presented itself, nearby rue Arnoldi was renamed rue Namur in 1980. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro,
Plamondon=On 29 May 1911, the municipal council changed the name of 8th Avenue to rue Plamondon without indicating the reasons for their choice. It probably refers to the painter Antoine Plamondon (1804-1895) or the lyric artist Rodolphe Plamondon (1875-1940). Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro,
Côte-Sainte-Catherine=Côte-Sainte-Catherine The territory which became the village of Outremont in 1875 had been known as côte Sainte-Catherine since the 17th century. As elsewhere, the côte's name was used for its main street. In 1913, the chemin de la Côte Sainte-Catherine ended at chemin de la Côte des Neiges; the western portion on which the metro station lies is the most recent part of the road. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro,
Snowdon=Rue Snowdon, named after the owner of the land on which it was built, gave its name to the neighbourhood whose nucleus (boul. Décarie and chemin Queen-Mary) is near this station. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Villa-Maria=Villa-Maria In 1854, the Congrégation de Notre-Dame convent acquired a mansion built in 1803 for Mr. Justice James Monk. The nuns created a school there which received its first students in the autumn of that year. The nuns named the school Villa Maria after the Virgin Mary, who had been named the patron of their order by its founder, St. Marguerite Bourgeoys. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Vendôme=There is no definite information as to the origin of this street's name, bestowed on it in 1910. Vendôme is the name of a square in Paris and of a subprefecture in the department of Loir-et-Cher. However, the presence of the &quot;de&quot; in avenue de Vendôme make it more likely that the street was named after one or more of the Dukes of Vendôme, several of whom played important roles in the history of France. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Place-St-Henri=Place-Saint-Henri In 1810 a chapel under the protection of St. Henry was built near here, supposedly in honour of Father Henri-Auguste Roux (1798-1831), superior of Saint-Sulpice Seminary. Place Saint-Henri, as the junction between the former rue Saint-Bonaventure (now Saint-Jacques) and the road leading to Lachine, became an important urban hub and gave its name to the entire district now called St-Henri. This historic working-class district, immortalized in Gabrielle Roy's novel The Tin Flute, had previously been known as Les Tanneries in the 18th century. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Lionel-Groulx=Lionel-Groulx Abbé Lionel Groulx (1878-1967), a native of Vaudreuil, was an influential Québécois historian. He studied in theology at the Grand Séminaire de Montréal and was ordained in 1903. He taught at Valleyfield seminary from 1903 to 1915 and was named honorary canon in 1943. Abbé Groulx was also the founding president of the Franco-American History Institute in 1946 and director of the Révue d'histoire de l'Amérique française (1947-1967). This station's name was changed during the planning phase to commemorate Abbé Groulx, after his death, and rue Lionel-Groulx was renamed after the station. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Georges-Vanier=Georges-Vanier Georges-Philias Vanier (1888-1967), military man, lawyer, and diplomat, served as Canada's ambassador to all Allied governments in exile in London during World War II. He was named Governor-General of Canada in 1959 and served until his death. He was born a short way from the street that is now named for him. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Lucien-l'Allier=Lucien-L'Allier Lucien L'Allier (1909-1978), engineer and director of public works for the City of Montreal, was the chief engineer for the construction of Île Notre-Dame and the enlargement of Île Sainte-Hélène for Expo 67. He also served as the president of the Montreal Transit Commission starting in 1964, and of the Montreal Urban Community Transit Commission from its creation in 1970. During his tenure, he served as chief engineer for the initial network of the metro. Due to his vital contributions to the urban fabric of Montreal, the planned metro Aqueduc was renamed in his honour, as was the rue de l'Aqueduc north of rue St-Jacques. A commemorative plaque in the metro station has been installed to his memory. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Bonaventure=Bonaventure Giovanni di Fidanza (1221-1274) was a Franciscan monk, theologian, philosopher, and mystic, who was canonized as Saint Bonaventure. Rue Bonaventure or Saint-Bonaventure originally designated the length of today's rue Saint-Jacques between rue McGill and place Saint-Henri. The old rue Saint-Bonaventure gave its name to Bonaventure Station, which was situated at Saint-Bonaventure and Windsor (now Saint-Jacques and Peel) and operated by the Grand Trunk Railway. The station was for decades a major hub for the transport of goods and passengers. The memory of this station gave its name in turn to the Place Bonaventure complex, whose construction caused the original metro plans to be extended and a station to be situated underneath it. So from the street to the train station to the complex to the metro station, St. Bonaventure's name was perpetuated to the present day. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Square-Victoria=Square-Victoria Formerly known as place du Marché-à-Foin and place des Commissaires, square Victoria was so named, after Queen Victoria (1819-1901), queen of Great Britain and Ireland 1837-1901 and empress of India 1876-1901, on the occasion of the Prince of Wales' visit to Montreal in 1860. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Place-d'Armes=Place-d'Armes The current place d'Armes is actually the third location in Montreal to bear that name, a long-used French term for a place where a city's defenders assemble. The statue in Montreal's place d'Armes specifically commemorates Paul Chomedey de Maisonneuve's defense of the young French settlement against the Iroquois, against whom sieur de Maisonneuve's allies the Hurons were fighting to regain land the Iroquois had conquered. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Champ-de-Mars=Champ-de-Mars The location of Champ de Mars was formerly the site of fortifications for the young city's defense. They were demolished at the beginning of the 19th century soon after City Hall and the Palais de Justice were built. The site's name commemorates its former military purpose; Mars was the Roman god of war, and campus Martius was a Latin term for a military exercise ground. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Berri-UQAM=The origin of the name Berri, in use since 1818, is still uncertain. The lands in this area, which belonged to Migeon de Branssat in 1669, were called La Gauchetière and Berry. It is unknown whether this name refers to the French province by the same name. The Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM) was created by the Government of Quebec in 1968, and was opened in 1969. The campus in this neighbourhood was opened in 1979. The station was renamed Berri-UQAM on 1 January 1988; until that time, it was called Berri-de Montigny Rue de Montigny (now part of boul. de Maisonneuve, except for a small portion near Place des Arts) was named in honour of the Testard de Montigny family. The Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM) was established by the Government of Québec in accordance with the Act respecting the Université du Québec adopted on December 18, 1968. The UQAM welcomed its first students in the Fall of 1969. The institution had a rapid growth and inaugurated phase 1 of its new campus in 1979 near the metro station. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Sherbrooke=Sir John Coape Sherbrooke (1764-1830), a British military man, served tours of duty around the world, and was the governor of Nova Scotia during the War of 1812 between the United States and Canada. He later served as governor-general of British North America 1816-1818, during which time Lower Canada enjoyed a brief period of calm. Sherbrooke St. was constructed in the area then known as Côte-à-Baron circa 1817. An 1825 map indicates that the street, then known as rue Ste-Marie or rue Sherbrooke, ran from rue St-Denis to what is now av. Union. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Mont-Royal=Although at 250 metres many would call it a hill, Mount Royal dominates the skyline of Montreal. So named in 1535 by Jacques Cartier in honour of his patron King François I of France, the mountain in turn gave its name to the city. The mountain actually has three peaks: Westmount, Outremont, and Mount Royal itself. Mount Royal Park, the jewel of downtown Montreal, was designed by the famous landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted, who also designed Central Park in New York. Avenue du Mont-Royal is so called as it leads up to the foot of the mountain and the border of the park. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Laurier=Sir Wilfrid Laurier (1841-1919), the first French-Canadian prime minister, came from St-Lin and obtained his law degree at McGill University. He practised briefly in Montreal before moving to L&#146;Avenir, and then to Arthabaska where he managed the newspaper Le Défricheur. He served as a member of the Quebec legislative assembly (1871-1894), until being elected to the House of Commons where he served until his death. Leader of the Liberal Party (1887-1919) and Prime Minister (1896-1911), he participated in all the critical political questions of the time, including free trade with the United States, the autonomy of Canada within the British Empire, the Manitoba schools question, the construction of a second transcontinental railway, the birth of the Royal Canadian Navy, and the creation of the provinces of Saskatchewan and Alberta and of the Yukon Territory. Widely recognized as one of the most important figures in Canadian history, he is depicted on the five-dollar bill. Avenue Saint-Louis was renamed avenue Laurier in his honour in 1899. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Rosemont=Having acquired a large tract of land in this neighbourhood from the Canadian Pacific Railway, a land speculator named Ucal-Henri Dandurand and his associate Herbert Holt set up the Angus shops, and sold the leftover land for residential use. In 1905, the area was incorporated as the Village of Rosemont, named after Dandurand's mother, Rose Phillips. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Beaubien=Rue Beaubien's name recalls one of the large and ancient French-Canadian families of Quebec, many of whose members undertook important careers in politics, finance, and the liberal arts. In particular, Dr. Pierre Beaubien owned a great deal of land in Outremont around the turn of the century. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Jean-Talon=Jean Talon (1626-1694), a French military man, served as commissioner of war in Flanders, intendent of the army of Turenne (1653), commissioner of Quesnoy (1654), and intendent of Hainaut (1655). He left this post ten years later to become intendant of New France from 1665-1668 and 1670-1672. Following the instructions of Colbert and his own considerable understanding of the colony&#146;s needs, he undertook many measures to diversify the economy, reorganize the justice system, facilitate communications, and increase population density. He succeeded in settling 2000 immigrants in his territory. Unfortunately, his work in several areas did not survive his return to France. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Jarry=Rue Jarry is named for Stanislas Blégnier dit Jarry père, who worked and owned the land across which this street was opened. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Crémazie=Octave Crémazie (1927-1879), one of the most important figures in Quebec literature, was confirmed as the father of French-Canadian poetry by his patriotic poem &quot;Le Drapeau de Carillon,&quot; published in 1858, about the defense of Fort Carillon by General Montcalm. He fled Quebec for France in 1858 due to a scandal, and died at Le Havre. However, his popularity suffered no decline and Boulevard Crémazie was named in his honour in 1914. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro,
Sauvé=So named in 1912, rue Sauvé, like many streets in Montreal, bears the name of a former owner of land crossed by the roadway. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro,
Henri-Bourassa=Henri-Bourassa The journalist and politician Henri Bourassa (1868-1952), son of the painter Napoléon Bourassa and grandson of Louis-Joseph Papineau, was elected mayor of Montebello at 22 years of age. He was later elected to both provincial and federal governments. His best known contribution, however, was as the founder of the newspaper Le Devoir in 1910, and as its editor-in-chief until 1932. Boul. Henri-Bourassa was so named a few months after his death in 1952. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro,
                                        
[3 BLUE SNOWDON - SAINT-MICHEL]
Snowdon=Rue Snowdon, named after the owner of the land on which it was built, gave its name to the neighbourhood whose nucleus (boul. Décarie and chemin Queen-Mary) is near this station. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Jean-Talon=Jean Talon (1626-1694), a French military man, served as commissioner of war in Flanders, intendent of the army of Turenne (1653), commissioner of Quesnoy (1654), and intendent of Hainaut (1655). He left this post ten years later to become intendant of New France from 1665-1668 and 1670-1672. Following the instructions of Colbert and his own considerable understanding of the colony&#146;s needs, he undertook many measures to diversify the economy, reorganize the justice system, facilitate communications, and increase population density. He succeeded in settling 2000 immigrants in his territory. Unfortunately, his work in several areas did not survive his return to France. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
                                        
[4 YELLOW BERRI-UQAM - LONGUEUIL]
Berri-UQAM=The origin of the name Berri, in use since 1818, is still uncertain. The lands in this area, which belonged to Migeon de Branssat in 1669, were called La Gauchetière and Berry. It is unknown whether this name refers to the French province by the same name. The Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM) was created by the Government of Quebec in 1968, and was opened in 1969. The campus in this neighbourhood was opened in 1979. The station was renamed Berri-UQAM on 1 January 1988; until that time, it was called Berri-de Montigny Rue de Montigny (now part of boul. de Maisonneuve, except for a small portion near Place des Arts) was named in honour of the Testard de Montigny family. The Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM) was established by the Government of Québec in accordance with the Act respecting the Université du Québec adopted on December 18, 1968. The UQAM welcomed its first students in the Fall of 1969. The institution had a rapid growth and inaugurated phase 1 of its new campus in 1979 near the metro station. Source : Translated from Tour toponymique Les stations de métro, Communauté urbaine de Montréal, 1989
Jean-Drapeau=Jean-Drapeau The initial name of this station - Île-Sainte-Hélène - has been changed for Jean-Drapeau in May 2001. Jean Drapeau (1916-1999), mayor of Montreal 1954-7 and 1960-86, oversaw many pivotal events in Montreal's 20th century history, including the inauguration of Place des Arts, Expo 67 and the 1976 Olympics; the annexation of Rivière-des-Prairies, Saraguay, Ville Saint-Michel, and Pointe-aux-Trembles; and not least the construction of the metro. The Parc des Îles, and consequently metro Île Sainte-Hélène, were renamed in his honour in 2001.
